Add ESP Serial Flasher as external project (#103013)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/develop/manifest/external/esp-serial-flasher.rst

.. _external_module_esp_serial_flasher:

ESP Serial Flasher
##################

Introduction
************

ESP Serial Flasher is a portable C library developed and maintained by Espressif Systems that enables programming and interaction with Espressif SoCs (ESP8266, ESP32 series) from host microcontrollers running embedded operating systems. The library provides a unified API for flash operations, RAM download and execution, and device management across multiple communication interfaces including UART, USB CDC ACM, SPI, and SDIO.

This module is particularly valuable for Zephyr-based applications that need to program or interact with Espressif target devices without requiring a PC or Python runtime environment. It offers similar functionality to esptool but is optimized for resource-constrained embedded systems, making it ideal for production programming tools, bootloaders, and firmware update mechanisms.

> ESP Serial Flasher supports a wide range of Espressif SoCs including ESP8266, ESP32, ESP32-S2, ESP32-S3, ESP32-C2, ESP32-C3, ESP32-H2, ESP32-C6, ESP32-C5, and ESP32-P4. The library is integrated into Zephyr as an external project module in ``subsys/esp_loader`` folder.

Reviewer: "The library is integrated into Zephyr as an external project module in ``subsys/esp_loader`` folder."
what does this mean?

Author: The `subsys/esp_loader` is part of the library. I'll rephrase it.

management across multiple communication interfaces including UART, USB CDC ACM, SPI, and SDIO.

This module is particularly valuable for Zephyr-based applications that need to program or interact
with Espressif target devices without requiring a PC or Python runtime environment.
It offers similar functionality to esptool but is optimized for resource-constrained embedded systems,
making it ideal for production programming tools, bootloaders, and firmware update mechanisms.

ESP Serial Flasher supports a wide range of Espressif SoCs. For the actual list of supported
targets and more information about the library you will find at `ESP Serial Flasher GitHub`_.

ESP Serial Flasher is licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

Usage with Zephyr
*****************

To pull in ESP Serial Flasher as a Zephyr module, either add it as a West project
in the ``west.yaml`` file or pull it in by adding a submanifest
(e.g. ``zephyr/submanifests/esf.yaml``) file with the following content and run ``west update``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: esp-serial-flasher
         url: https://github.com/espressif/esp-serial-flasher
         revision: master

>          path: modules/esp-serial-flasher  # adjust path or leave blank for zephyrproject root

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         path: modules/esp-serial-flasher  # adjust path or leave blank for west workspace root directory
```

Once the module is added, you can include the main header file in your application code:

.. code-block:: c

   #include <esp_loader.h>

The Zephyr integration provides a devicetree interface (``espressif,esp-tool``) that can be

> configured via device tree. The driver handles UART communication, GPIO control for boot and

Reviewer: a devicetree interface that can be configured via devicetree? 🤔

.. _external_module_esp_serial_flasher:

ESP Serial Flasher
##################

Introduction
************

ESP Serial Flasher is a portable C library developed and maintained by Espressif Systems that

> enables programming and interaction with Espressif SoCs (ESP8266, ESP32 series) from

Reviewer 2: "programming and interacting"

host microcontrollers running embedded operating systems.
The library provides a unified API for flash operations, RAM download and execution, and device
management across multiple communication interfaces including UART, USB CDC ACM, SPI, and SDIO.

This module is particularly valuable for Zephyr-based applications that need to program or interact
with Espressif target devices without requiring a PC or Python runtime environment.
It offers similar functionality to esptool but is optimized for resource-constrained embedded systems,
making it ideal for production programming tools, bootloaders, and firmware update mechanisms.

ESP Serial Flasher supports a wide range of Espressif SoCs. For the list of supported
targets and more information, see `ESP Serial Flasher GitHub`_.

ESP Serial Flasher is licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

Usage with Zephyr
*****************

To pull in ESP Serial Flasher as a Zephyr module, either add it as a West project

> in the ``west.yaml`` file or pull it in by adding a submanifest

Reviewer 3: typo: `west.yml`

Author: Thanks for spotting that. Interestingly enough, the submanifest files are `yaml` :)

(e.g. ``zephyr/submanifests/esp-serial-flasher.yaml``) with the following content and run
``west update``:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: esp-serial-flasher
         url: https://github.com/espressif/esp-serial-flasher

>          revision: master

Reviewer 3: It should always pin to master?

Perhaps a note? Not blocking.

```c
.. note::

   The revision shown above is an example. Pin a specific tag or commit
   to ensure reproducible builds.
```

Author: The library is being developed and tested, and should work in newer releases. I prefer to point to master and let people use the latest features.

         path: modules/esp-serial-flasher # adjust path or leave blank for west workspace root directory

Once the module is added, you can include the main header file in your application code:

.. code-block:: c

   #include <esp_loader.h>

The Zephyr integration provides a devicetree binding, ``espressif,esp-loader``, which must be
defined in your application's devicetree at least once. Select the active instance with the
``zephyr,esp-loader`` chosen property. The driver handles UART communication, GPIO control for
boot and reset pins, and provides high-level APIs for flash operations, device connection, and
target management.

Firmware images for the target can be embedded in the host application.
Place the binaries in a ``target-firmware/`` folder and describe flash addresses in
``target-firmware/images.csv``: one line per image as ``<filename>;<offset>``, with the offset in
hex and **no** ``0x`` prefix (for example ``app.bin;10000``).

After including ``bin_images_sections.cmake`` (from the Zephyr example), ``create_resources()`` in

> your application's ``CMakeLists.txt`` converts these files into C arrays. Enable the driver with ``CONFIG_ESP_SERIAL_FLASHER=y`` in ``prj.conf``.

Reviewer 3: I would say this line needs a break (>100 chars), but sounds compliance accepts as is.
